_sources/furtherAvenues/mapreduce.rst, before:

4.1 MapReduce
---------------

Modern Internet search engines must process truly enormous amounts of data.  For example, Google search gathers information from hundreds of billions of web pages, and produces an index of every word that appears on every web page, requiring `over 100,000,000,000,000,000 (10^17) bytes of data <https://www.google.com/search/howsearchworks/crawling-indexing/>`_! How is it possible to perform such a huge computation in a reasonable amount of time?  

Distributed computing using a MapReduce strategy is a common approach to performing such “big data” computations.  By using 
Map-Reduce on clusters of thousands of powerful networked  computers, the work can be divided up among those  computers in order to complete in hours what would take a  single computer years to perform. Those computers are typically part of a cloud computing service provided by companies such as Amazon, Google, or Microsoft.  The open-source MapReduce framework Hadoop, used by over half of Fortune 500 companies, is designed for reliability, making it possible to continue a computation  with minimal delay even if computers or networks crash during the job.  

In this section, we will describe the MapReduce programming model and explore how to create programs capable of true big-data computations. 

4.1.1 The MapReduce programming strategy
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A MapReduce framework such as Hadoop provides most of the details of data handling, such as dividing enormous data sets up into *splits* that are small enough for one computer to process, managing the low-level input and output operations, replicating the data to prevent data loss if one or more computers or networks crash, and automatically recovering from such crashes during a big-data computation.  Thus, an application programmer never writes the "main program" for a MapReduce computation, which is unlike other programs in this book.  Instead, the programmer writes two functions that determine how the framework should process the data, called the mapper and the reducer.  

- The *mapper* function operates on the input data and generates *key-value pairs* that represent some information of interest from that input. 

  For example, if we are interested in finding all occurrences of words in a data set of web pages, a mapper function might operate on one line of a web page and produce a key-value pair for each word in that line, where the key is that word and the value is the name of that web page, e.g., ``("the", "mysite/index.html")``.    

- The *reducer* function acts on all key-value pairs produced by mappers *that have the same key* and produces other key-value pairs that distill or summarize the interesting information in those input pairs.  

  For example, if we're interested in how frequently each word appears in each web page, and the input key-value pairs have the form ``("the", "mysite/index.html")``, then a reducer might produce key-value pairs of the form ``("the mysite/index.html", "28")`` where 28 is the count of input pairs matching that web-page value.  

Figure 1 shows the effects of calling mappers on each line of each split of input data, then calling reducers on the various key-value pairs produced by those mappers.  As this illustration shows, each reducer call handles all the key-value pairs for a particular key.  

.. figure:: mapreduce_Figure1.jpg
    :width: 720px
    :align: center
    :height: 540px
    :alt: alternate text
    :figclass: align-center

    Figure 1: The concept behind how map functions can run in parallel and
    pass their results to reduce functions, whose results are output in
    sorted order by the keys created by the reduce function.



We could also pack more information in the key or value, perhaps adding the line number to the value ``("the", "72 mysite/index.html")``.

provides configuration options (e.g., specifying where to find the data set, where to store the results, perhaps indicating how to split the data, etc.) plus two key 

xxxxx

Talk about web-search in particular, and introduce the notion of the cloud.

Give students an overview of the MapReduce paradigm, and then explain how they can access/play with it. 

Talk about WebMapReduce, and give them a link to play with. 

Also talk about Amazon EC2 clusters, and how they can run their own MapReduce jobs on those.

Commit message:

mapreduce.rst - more mapreduce overview

_sources/furtherAvenues/mapreduce.rst, after:

4.1 MapReduce
---------------

Modern Internet search engines must process truly enormous amounts of data.  For example, Google search gathers information from hundreds of billions of web pages, and produces an index of every word that appears on every web page, requiring `over 100,000,000,000,000,000 (10^17) bytes of data <https://www.google.com/search/howsearchworks/crawling-indexing/>`_! How is it possible to perform such a huge computation in a reasonable amount of time?  

Distributed computing using a MapReduce strategy is a common approach to performing such “big data” computations.  By using 
Map-Reduce on clusters of thousands of powerful networked  computers, the work can be divided up among those  computers in order to complete in hours what would take a  single computer years to perform. Those computers are typically part of a cloud computing service provided by companies such as Amazon, Google, or Microsoft.  The open-source MapReduce framework Hadoop, used by over half of Fortune 500 companies, is designed for reliability, making it possible to continue a computation  with minimal delay even if computers or networks crash during the job.  

In this section, we will describe the MapReduce programming model and explore how to create programs capable of true big-data computations. 

4.1.1 The MapReduce programming strategy
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A MapReduce framework such as Hadoop provides most of the details of data handling, such as dividing enormous data sets up into *splits* that are small enough for one computer to process, managing the low-level input and output operations, replicating the data to prevent data loss if one or more computers or networks crash, and automatically recovering from such crashes during a big-data computation.  Thus, an application programmer never writes the "main program" for a MapReduce computation, which is unlike other programs in this book.  Instead, the programmer writes two functions that determine how the framework should process the data, called the mapper and the reducer.  

- The *mapper* function operates on the input data and generates *key-value pairs* that represent some information of interest from that input. 

  For example, if we are interested in finding all occurrences of words in a data set of web pages, a mapper function might operate on one line of a web page and produce a key-value pair for each word in that line, where the key is that word and the value is the name of that web page, e.g., ``("the", "mysite/index.html")``.    

- The *reducer* function acts on all key-value pairs produced by mappers *that have the same key* and produces other key-value pairs that distill or summarize the interesting information in those input pairs.  

  For example, if we're interested in how frequently each word appears in each web page, and the input key-value pairs have the form ``("the", "mysite/index.html")``, then a reducer might produce key-value pairs of the form ``("the mysite/index.html", "28")`` where 28 is the count of input pairs matching that web-page value.  

Figure 1 shows the effects of calling mappers on each line of each split of input data, then calling reducers on the various key-value pairs produced by those mappers.  

.. figure:: mapreduce_Figure1.jpg
    :width: 720px
    :align: center
    :height: 540px
    :alt: alternate text
    :figclass: align-center

    Figure 1: Illustration of calling a mapper function named ``map()`` many times in parallel and passing the results of those calls to calls of a reducer function named ``reduce()``.

As Figure 1 shows, each reducer call handles all the key-value pairs for a particular key.  For instance, in our example above of counting the frequencies of words within web pages, if the key K1 in the diagram is the word ``"the"`` and the values v1, v2, and v3 are the names of three different web pages such as ``"mysite/index.html"`` and two others, then the top reducer would handle all three of those pairs (plus any other unshown pairs that have the key ``"the"``).

By writing the mapper and reducer functions for a MapReduce framework, a programmer specifies what computation should be performed on a potentially gigantic data set.  This modest two-function programming strategy provides a surprising amount of algorithmic control for big-data computations.  Here are some examples, starting with the word-frequency example above:

# Goal
    Count frequencies of all words in all web pages in a data set of web pages
  mapper.
    Read one line of input from a web page ``*wpname*``, and produce a key-value pair ``(*w*, *wpname*)`` for each word ``*w*`` that appears on that line
  reducer
    Receive all key-value pairs ``(*w*, *wpname*)`` for a given word ``*w*``, and produce one key-value pair ``(*w wpname*, *ct*)`` for each web page ``*wpname*``, where ``*ct*`` is the number of input pairs with value ``*wpanme*``.
# Goal
    For every word found in a data set of web pages, produce a list of all line numbers of web pages containing that word.
  mapper
    Read one line of input from a web page ``*wpname*``, and produce a key-value pair ``(*w*, *ln wpname*)`` for each word ``*w*`` that appears on that line, where ``*ln*`` is the line number that was read within ``*wpname*``
  reducer
    Receive all key-value pairs ``(*w*, *ln wpname*)`` for a given word ``*w*``, and produce one key-value pair ``(*w wpname*, *ln:subscript:`1` ln:subscript:`2` ln:subscript:`3` ...*)`` for each web page ``*wpname*``, where ``*ln:subscript:`n` *`` is the ``*n*``th value of ``*ln*`` among input pairs with values ``*ln wpanme*``.
# Goal
    Find the average rating for each movie in a data set of movie ratings.
  mapper
    Read one movie rating, consisting of an integer movie id ``*mid*``, an integer rating from 0 to 5 ``*r*``, and other information such as reviewer and date.  Produce a pair ``("*mid*", "*r*")``
  reducer
    Receive all key-value pairs ``("*mid*", "*r*")`` for a given movie id ``*mid*``, and produce a pair ``("*mid*", "*ave*")`` where ``*ave*`` is the average value of ``*r*`` among all those input pairs.  



provides configuration options (e.g., specifying where to find the data set, where to store the results, perhaps indicating how to split the data, etc.) plus two key 

xxxxx

Talk about web-search in particular, and introduce the notion of the cloud.

Give students an overview of the MapReduce paradigm, and then explain how they can access/play with it. 

Talk about WebMapReduce, and give them a link to play with. 

Also talk about Amazon EC2 clusters, and how they can run their own MapReduce jobs on those.
