_sources/index.rst, before:

===================================
Parallel Computing for Beginners
===================================

By Joel C. Adams, Richard A. Brown, Suzanne J. Matthews, and Elizabeth Shoop (CSinParallel)

**NOTE: THIS BOOK IS STILL A WORK IN PROGRESS!**

Table of Contents
-----------------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   front_matter/toctree.rst

   introduction/toctree.rst

   sharedMemory/toctree.rst

   messagePassing/toctree.rst

   commonAlgorithms/toctree.rst

   furtherAvenues/toctree.rst


Acknowledgements
::::::::::::::::

.. raw:: html

	<div style="width: 1000px; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto;"><img src="https://www.nsf.gov/images/logos/NSF_4-Color_bitmap_Logo.png" width="75px" \><br /> This work is sponsored by National Science Foundation (NSF) Collaborative Research Grants DUE-1822480/1822486/1855761. <i>Collaborative Research: CSinParallel: Experiential Learning of Parallel and Distributed Computing through Sight, Sound, and Touch</i> 
	<p>

	<a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/"><img alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0" src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-nd/4.0/88x31.png" /></a><br />This work is licensed under a <a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/">Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License</a></div>

Commit message:

updated front matter to include new authors

_sources/index.rst, after:

===================================
Parallel Computing for Beginners
===================================

By: Joel C. Adams, Richard A. Brown, Suzanne J. Matthews, and Elizabeth Shoop (CSinParallel) 
and Contributing Authors: Dorian Arnold, Steven Bogaerts, and John Rieffel

**NOTE: THIS BOOK IS STILL A WORK IN PROGRESS!**

Table of Contents
-----------------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   front_matter/toctree.rst

   introduction/toctree.rst

   sharedMemory/toctree.rst

   messagePassing/toctree.rst

   commonAlgorithms/toctree.rst

   furtherAvenues/toctree.rst


Acknowledgements
::::::::::::::::

.. raw:: html

	<div style="width: 1000px; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto;"><img src="https://www.nsf.gov/images/logos/NSF_4-Color_bitmap_Logo.png" width="75px" \><br /> This work is sponsored by National Science Foundation (NSF) Collaborative Research Grants DUE-1822480/1822486/1855761. <i>Collaborative Research: CSinParallel: Experiential Learning of Parallel and Distributed Computing through Sight, Sound, and Touch</i> 
	<p>

	<a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/"><img alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0" src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-nd/4.0/88x31.png" /></a><br />This work is licensed under a <a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/">Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License</a></div>
